Spec event edits (#1211)
matrix-org/matrix-spec: content/client-server-api/modules/event_replacements.md

---
type: module
---

### Event replacements

{{% added-in v="1.4" %}}

Event replacements, or "message edit events", are events that use an [event
relationship](http://localhost:1313/client-server-api/#forming-relationships-between-events)
with a `rel_type` of `m.replace`, which indicates that the original event is
intended to be replaced.

An example of a message edit event might look like this:

> ```json

Author: json5 doesn't get synatax-highlighted by hugo. OTOH, its json syntax highlighter is happy to accept comments.

> ```json

Reviewer: that's annoying, but not for reasons that matter.

{
    "type": "m.room.message",
    "content": {
        "body": "* Hello! My name is bar",
        "msgtype": "m.text",
        "m.new_content": {
            "body": "Hello! My name is bar",
            "msgtype": "m.text"
        },
        "m.relates_to": {
            "rel_type": "m.replace",
            "event_id": "$some_event_id"
        }
    },
    // ... other fields required by events
}
```

The `content` of the replacement must contain a `m.new_content` property which
defines the replacement `content`. The normal `content` properties (`body`,
`msgtype` etc.) provide a fallback for clients which do not understand
replacement events.

`m.new_content` can include any properties that would normally be found in
an event's content property, such as `formatted_body` (see [`m.room.message`
`msgtypes`](#mroommessage-msgtypes)).

#### Validity of message edit events

There are a number of requirements on message edit events, which must be satisfied for the replacement to be considered valid:

 * As with all event relationships, the original event and replacement event
   must have the same `room_id` (i.e. it is not possible to send an event in

>    one room and then an edited version in a different room).

Reviewer: phrasing: half of the `i.e.` bits are saying "You..." but the others say "It...". It's easier language-wise to stick to "You..." than it is to try and adopt "It..." across the points.

 * The original event and replacement event must have the same `sender`
   (i.e. you cannot edit someone else's messages).

 * The replacement and original events must have the same `type` (i.e. editing
   an event cannot change its type).

>  * Neither the replacement nor original events may have a `state_key` property

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * Neither the replacement nor original events have a `state_key` property
```

Reviewer: "may" is highly ambiguous when reading as a non-native speaker, so we avoid it. I think the sentence works just fine without the word rather than trying to find a replacement.

If we do want a word in here though, "must not have a state_key" would be the phrasing to adopt.

Author: ```suggestion
 * The replacement and original events must not have a `state_key` property
```

>    (i.e. it is not possible to edit a state event).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   (i.e. you cannot edit state events at all).
```

 * The original event must not, itself, have a `rel_type` of `m.replace`
   (i.e. you cannot edit an edit — though you can send multiple edits for a
   single original event).

 * The replacement event (once decrypted, if appropriate) must have an
   `m.new_content` property.

If any of these criteria are not satisfied, implementations should ignore the
replacement event (the content of the original should not be replaced, and the
edit should not be included in the server-side aggregation).

Note that the [`msgtype`](#mroommessage-msgtypes) property of replacement

> `m.room.message` events need *not* be the same as in the original event. For

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`m.room.message` events does *not* need to be the same as in the original event. For
```

Reviewer: non-native speaker clarity

example, it is legitimate to replace an `m.text` event with an `m.emote`.

#### Editing encrypted events

If the original event was [encrypted](#end-to-end-encryption), the replacement
should be too. In that case, `m.new_content` is placed in the content of the
encrypted payload. As with all event relationships, the `m.relates_to` property
must be sent in the unencrypted (cleartext) part of the event.

For example, a replacement for an encrypted event might look like this:

> For example, an encrypted replacement event might look like this:

Reviewer: I prefer the second, but either are fine to me.

Author: but both is twice as good, right? :facepalm:

Author: ```suggestion
For example, a replacement for an encrypted event might look like this:
```

> For example, a replacement for an encrypted event might look like this:
> 
> For example, an encrypted replacement event might look like this:

Author: ```suggestion
For example, a replacement for an encrypted event might look like this:
```

> ```json

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```json5
```

{
    "type": "m.room.encrypted",
    "content": {
        "m.relates_to": {
            "rel_type": "m.replace",
            "event_id": "$some_event_id"
        },
        "algorithm": "m.megolm.v1.aes-sha2",
        "sender_key": "<sender_curve25519_key>",
        "device_id": "<sender_device_id>",
        "session_id": "<outbound_group_session_id>",
        "ciphertext": "<encrypted_payload_base_64>"
    }

>     // ...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // irrelevant fields not shown
```

}
```

... and, once decrypted, the payload might look like this:

```json
{
    "type": "m.room.<event_type>",
    "room_id": "!some_room_id",
    "content": {
        "body": "* Hello! My name is bar",
        "msgtype": "m.text",
        "m.new_content": {
            "body": "Hello! My name is bar",
            "msgtype": "m.text"
        }
    }
}
```

Note that:

>  * There is no `m.relates_to` property in the encrypted payload. (Any such property would be ignored.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * There is no `m.relates_to` property in the encrypted payload. If there was, it would be ignored.
```

>  * There is no `m.new_content` property in the cleartext content of the `m.room.encrypted` event. (Again, any such property would be ignored.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * There is no `m.new_content` property in the cleartext content of the `m.room.encrypted` event. As above, if there was then it would be ignored.
```

> The payload of an encrypted replacement event must be encrypted as normal, including ratcheting any [Megolm](#mmegolmv1aes-sha2) session as normal. The original Megolm ratchet entry should **not** be re-used.

Reviewer: This is quite confusing in this context, I think because it kinda comes out of nowhere and uses terms not currently present in the spec. It sounds like we're trying to warn the reader to not re-use sessions? (if so, we should say that in a warning or info box rather than as a floating paragraph)

Author: yeah, exactly. I'll stick it in an info box.

Author: > It sounds like we're trying to warn the reader to not re-use sessions?

To be more precise: we're trying to warn the reader not to re-use the same ratchet entry in a given session. A new ratchet entry in the existing session is fine.

#### Applying `m.new_content`

> When applying a replacement, the `content` of the original event is replaced
> entirely by the `m.new_content` from the replacement event, with the exception
> of `m.relates_to`, which is left *unchanged*. (Any `m.relates_to` property
> within `m.new_content` should be ignored.)

Reviewer: This says "replace" a lot:

```suggestion
When applying a replacement, the `content` of the original event is treated as
overwritten entirely by `m.new_content`, with the exception of `m.relates_to`,
which is left *unchanged* because any `m.relates_to` property within `m.new_content`
is ignored. Note that the original event's `content` is not actually overwritten
or replaced by the new content: this is to provide history of the changes.
```

also added a bit to clarify that the original event doesn't change because that'd cause problems for auth and such: we're just dealing with it at the client level like that, because we can.

Author: One of the ideas here is that client impls *should* be allowed to overwrite the original event's `content`. You're right that servers need to preserve the original though.

```suggestion
When applying a replacement, the `content` of the original event is treated as
being overwritten entirely by `m.new_content`, with the exception of `m.relates_to`,
which is left *unchanged*. Any `m.relates_to` property within `m.new_content`
is ignored. (Note that server implementations must not *actually* overwrite
the original event's `content`: instead the server presents it as being overwritten
when it is served over the client-server API. See [Server-side replacement of content](#server-side-replacement-of-content)
below.
```

For example, given a pair of events:

```json
{
    "event_id": "$original_event",
    "type": "m.room.message",
    "content": {
        "body": "I really like cake",
        "msgtype": "m.text",
        "formatted_body": "I really like cake",
    }
}
```

```json
{
    "event_id": "$edit_event",
    "type": "m.room.message",
    "content": {
        "body": "* I really like *chocolate* cake",
        "msgtype": "m.text",
        "m.new_content": {
            "body": "I really like *chocolate* cake",
            "msgtype": "m.text",
            "com.example.extension_property": "chocolate"
        },
        "m.relates_to": {
            "rel_type": "m.replace",
            "event_id": "$original_event_id"
        }
    }
}
```

> ... then the end result is an event as shown below:

Reviewer: would be ideal to clarify this is affecting *representation* of the event and not that the server go out and do an `UPDATE` against its database.

Author: Do you think the above is now enough for this?

```json
{
    "event_id": "$original_event",
    "type": "m.room.message",
    "content": {
        "body": "I really like *chocolate* cake",
        "msgtype": "m.text",
        "com.example.extension_property": "chocolate"
    }
}
```

Note that `formatted_body` is now absent, because it was absent in the
replacement event.

#### Server behaviour

##### Server-side aggregation of `m.replace` relationships

Note that there can be multiple events with an `m.replace` relationship to a
given event (for example, if an event is edited multiple times). These should
be [aggregated](#aggregations) by the homeserver.

The aggregation format of `m.replace` relationships gives the `event_id`,
`origin_server_ts`, and `sender` of the **most recent** replacement event. The
most recent event is determined by comparing `origin_server_ts`; if two or more
replacement events have identical `origin_server_ts`, the event with the
lexicographically largest `event_id` is treated as more recent.

> This aggregation is bundled into the `unsigned/m.relations` property of any

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This aggregation is bundled under the `unsigned` property as `m.relations` for any
```

Reviewer: the `/` notation is relatively foreign and unclear within the spec

event that is the target of an `m.replace` relationship. For example:

> ```json

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```json5
```

{
  "event_id": "$original_event_id",

>   // ...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // irrelevant fields not shown
```

  "unsigned": {
    "m.relations": {
      "m.replace": {
        "event_id": "$latest_edit_event_id",
        "origin_server_ts": 1649772304313,
        "sender": "@editing_user:localhost"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

If the original event is

> [redacted](http://localhost:1313/client-server-api/#redactions), any

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[redacted](#redactions), any
```

`m.replace` relationship should **not** be bundled with it (whether or not any
subsequent replacements are themselves redacted). Note that this behaviour is
specific to the `m.replace` relationship. See also [redactions of edited
events](#redactions-of-edited-events) below.

> #### Server-side replacement of content

Author: ```suggestion
##### Server-side replacement of content
```

Whenever an `m.replace` is to be bundled with an event as above, the server
should also modify the content of the original event according to the
`m.new_content` of the most recent replacement event (determined as above).

An exception applies to [`GET /_matrix/client/v3/rooms/{roomId}/event/{eventId}`](#get_matrixclientv3roomsroomideventeventid),
which should return the unmodified event (though the relationship should still
be bundled, as described above).

#### Client behaviour

> Clients can often ignore `m.replace` events, since any events the server
> returns via the C-S API will be updated by the server to account for subsequent
> edits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clients can often ignore `m.replace` events, because any events returned
by the server to the client will be updated by the server to account for
subsequent edits.
```

"since" has too many meanings, like "may". "C-S API" is not a word we use.

However, clients should apply the replacement themselves when the server is
unable to do so. This happens in the following situations:

 * The client has already received and stored the original event before the
   message edit event arrives.

 * The original event (and hence its replacement) are encrypted.

Client authors are reminded to take note of the requirements for [Validity of
message edit events](#validity-of-message-edit-events), and to ignore any

> invalid edit events that may be received.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
invalid edit events that are received.
```

##### Permalinks

When creating [links](/appendices/#uris) to events (also known as permalinks),
clients build links which reference the event that the creator of the permalink
is viewing at that point (which might be a message edit event).

The client viewing the permalink should resolve this reference to the original
event, and then display the most recent version of that event.

#### Redactions of edited events

When an event using a `rel_type` of `m.replace` is [redacted](#redactions), it
removes that edit revision. This has little effect if there were subsequent
edits. However, if it was the most recent edit, the event is in effect
reverted to its content before the redacted edit.

Redacting the *original* message in effect removes the message, including all
subsequent edits, from the visible timeline. In this situation, homeservers
will return an empty `content` for the original event as with any other
redacted event, and as
[above](#server-side-aggregation-of-mreplace-relationships) the replacement

> events will not be bundled with the original event.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
events will not be bundled with the original event. Note that the subsequent edits are
not actually redacted themselves: they simply serve no purpose within the visible timeline.
```

#### Edits of replies

Some particular constraints apply to events which replace a
[reply](#rich-replies). In particular:

 * In contrast to the original reply, there should be no `m.in_reply_to`
   property in the the `m.relates_to` object, since it would be redundant (see

>    [Applying `m.new_content`](/#applying-mnew_content) above, which notes that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   [Applying `m.new_content`](#applying-mnew_content) above, which notes that
```

   the original event's `m.relates_to` is preserved), as well as being contrary
   to the spirit of the event relationships mechanism which expects only one
   "parent" per event.

 * `m.new_content` should **not** contain any [reply

>    fallback](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.3/client-server-api/#fallbacks-for-rich-replies),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   fallback](#fallbacks-for-rich-replies),
```

   since it is assumed that any client which can handle edits can also display
   replies natively. However, the `content` of the replacement event should provide
   fallback content for clients which support neither rich replies nor edits.

An example of an edit to a reply is as follows:

> ```json

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```json5
```

{

>   "type": "m.room.message",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  "type": "m.room.message",
  // irrelevant fields not shown
```

---

### Event replacements

{{% added-in v="1.4" %}}

Event replacements, or "message edit events", are events that use an [event
relationship](#forming-relationships-between-events)
with a `rel_type` of `m.replace`, which indicates that the original event is
intended to be replaced.

An example of a message edit event might look like this:

```json
{
    "type": "m.room.message",
    "content": {
        "body": "* Hello! My name is bar",
        "msgtype": "m.text",
        "m.new_content": {
            "body": "Hello! My name is bar",
            "msgtype": "m.text"
        },
        "m.relates_to": {
            "rel_type": "m.replace",
            "event_id": "$some_event_id"
        }
    },
    // ... other fields required by events
}
```

The `content` of the replacement must contain a `m.new_content` property which
defines the replacement `content`. The normal `content` properties (`body`,
`msgtype` etc.) provide a fallback for clients which do not understand
replacement events.

`m.new_content` can include any properties that would normally be found in
an event's content property, such as `formatted_body` (see [`m.room.message`
`msgtypes`](#mroommessage-msgtypes)).

> #### Validity of message edit events

Author: done, I hope

> #### Validity of message edit events
> 
> There are a number of requirements on message edit events, which must be satisfied for the replacement to be considered valid:

Author: ```suggestion
#### Validity of replacement events

There are a number of requirements on replacement events, which must be satisfied for the replacement to be considered valid:
```

            "event_id": "$some_event_id"
        },
        "algorithm": "m.megolm.v1.aes-sha2",
        "sender_key": "<sender_curve25519_key>",
        "device_id": "<sender_device_id>",
        "session_id": "<outbound_group_session_id>",
        "ciphertext": "<encrypted_payload_base_64>"
    }
    // irrelevant fields not shown
}
```

... and, once decrypted, the payload might look like this:

```json
{
    "type": "m.room.<event_type>",
    "room_id": "!some_room_id",
    "content": {
        "body": "* Hello! My name is bar",
        "msgtype": "m.text",
        "m.new_content": {
            "body": "Hello! My name is bar",
            "msgtype": "m.text"
        }
    }
}
```

Note that:

 * There is no `m.relates_to` property in the encrypted payload. If there was, it would be ignored.
 * There is no `m.new_content` property in the cleartext content of the `m.room.encrypted` event. As above, if there was then it would be ignored.

{{% boxes/note %}}
The payload of an encrypted replacement event must be encrypted as normal, including
ratcheting any [Megolm](#mmegolmv1aes-sha2) session as normal. The original Megolm
ratchet entry should **not** be re-used.

> {{% /boxes/note %}}

Reviewer: I'm afraid this still doesn't make any sense to me as a reader - we have zero mention of a "ratchet entry" in the spec, and it's not a term I've heard come up in conversation before. I realize this is coming from the MSC, but it also doesn't make sense there having re-read it.

Is this the "ratchet index" (a defined term in the spec) or can we just say it's "encrypted like any other event" and avoid the problem entirely?

Author: Right, it should be "ratchet value", from https://gitlab.matrix.org/matrix-org/olm/blob/master/docs/megolm.md#the-megolm-ratchet-algorithm.

My general feeling is: if you're implementing edits of encrypted events, you'll know what this means, and if you're not, you don't need to worry about it.

> can we just say it's "encrypted like any other event"

Well, at that point, it doesn't seem to give any information at all, so we might as well just omit it.

TBH it seems kindof obvious to me that we *wouldn't* reuse the old key, so I'd be happy to omit this block, but this text was added in response to @erikjohnston's question at https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2676#discussion_r913844941. Erik: do you have any thoughts on whether this text is necessary?

Reviewer: due to lack of comment I'm inclined to believe it's just a safety net thing. It doesn't feel particularly safe to assume that the person implementing edits of encrypted events is also aware of the intricacies of encryption, however I'm happy to go with whatever at this point.

#### Applying `m.new_content`

When applying a replacement, the `content` of the original event is treated as
being overwritten entirely by `m.new_content`, with the exception of `m.relates_to`,
which is left *unchanged*. Any `m.relates_to` property within `m.new_content`

> is ignored. (Note that server implementations must not *actually* overwrite
> the original event's `content`: instead the server presents it as being overwritten
> when it is served over the client-server API. See [Server-side replacement of content](#server-side-replacement-of-content)
> below.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is ignored.

{{% boxes/note %}}
Note that server implementations must not *actually* overwrite
the original event's `content`: instead the server presents it as being overwritten
when it is served over the client-server API. See [Server-side replacement of content](#server-side-replacement-of-content)
below.
{{% /boxes/note %}}
```

this seems important enough to be coloured blue, and is a bit long for brackets in retrospect.
